<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<refentry id="refentry-yang2dsdl">
  <refentryinfo>
    <date>18 March 2010</date>
  </refentryinfo>
  <refmeta>
    <refentrytitle>yang2dsdl</refentrytitle>
    <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
    <refmiscinfo class="date">2010-03-18</refmiscinfo>
    <refmiscinfo class="manual">pyang manual</refmiscinfo>
  </refmeta>
  <refnamediv id="yang2dsdl-name">
    <refname>yang2dsdl</refname>
    <refpurpose>translates YANG data models to DSDL schemas and
    validates instance documents.</refpurpose>
  </refnamediv>
  <refsynopsisdiv id="yang2dsdl-synopsis">
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>yang2dsdl</command>
      <arg choice="opt">-t <replaceable>target</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-d <replaceable>dir</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-b <replaceable>basename</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-v <replaceable>instance</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-s</arg>
      <arg choice="plain" rep="repeat">
        <replaceable>module</replaceable>
      </arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>yang2dsdl</command>
      <arg choice="plain">-h</arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
  </refsynopsisdiv>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-description">
    <title>Description</title>
    <para>This shell script facilitates the translation of a data
    model described by one or more input YANG modules to DSDL schemas
    (RELAX NG, Schematron and DSRL) for a selected instance XML
    document type. Optionally, an instance document of the given type
    can be validated against the schemas.</para>
    <para>The input module(s) may be expressed in YANG or YIN
    syntax. The output DSDL schemas are written to the directory
    <replaceable>dir</replaceable> (current directory by
    default). Unless the option <option>-s</option> is used, this
    directory must be writable.</para>

    <para>The <replaceable>target</replaceable> argument specifies the
    type of the target instance document. Supported values are:</para>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>dstore</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>Raw datastore contents without any
        encapsulating elements. If the input YANG module(s) define a
        data model with multiple root elements, the raw datastore may
        not be valid XML. In this case, the resulting DSDL schemas
        assume a choice of the top-level root
        elements.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>get-reply</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>A complete NETCONF protocol data unit (PDU)
        containing a reply to the &lt;get&gt;
        operation.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>getconf-reply</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>A complete NETCONF protocol data unit (PDU)
        containing a reply to the &lt;get-config&gt;
        operation.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>rpc</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>An RPC request defined in the input YANG
        module(s).</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>rpc-reply</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>An RPC reply defined in the input YANG
        module(s).</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><literal>notif</literal></term>
        <listitem><para>An event notification defined in the input
        YANG modules.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

    <para>The output schemas are contained in the following four files
    whose names depend on the arguments
    <replaceable>basename</replaceable> and
    <replaceable>target</replaceable>:</para>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename><replaceable>basename</replaceable>-<replaceable>target</replaceable>.rng</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem><para>RELAX NG schema for the target document
        type.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename><replaceable>basename</replaceable>-gdefs.rng</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem><para>Auxiliary RELAX NG schema containing global
        named pattern definitions (common for all
        targets).</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename><replaceable>basename</replaceable>-<replaceable>target</replaceable>.sch</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem><para>Schematron schema for the target document
        type.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename><replaceable>basename</replaceable>-<replaceable>target</replaceable>.dsrl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem><para>DSRL schema for the target document
        type.</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

    <para>Optional validation of an XML document stored in the file
    <replaceable>instance</replaceable> proceeds as follows:</para>
    <orderedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>Grammatical and datatype constraints are checked using
        the RELAX NG schema.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>The DSRL schema is used for adding default values
        together with ancestor containers to the instance document
        where necessary.</para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>Semantic constraints are checked using the Schematron
        schema. The skeleton implementation of <ulink
        url="http://www.schematron.com">ISO
        Schematron</ulink> is used for this purpose.</para>
      </listitem>
    </orderedlist>
    <para>If any of the schemas is missing, the corresponding step is
    skipped. Option <option>-s</option> may be used together with
    <option>-v</option> to validate an instance document without
    generating the schemas. This assumes that the schemas are already
    present in the directory selected by the <option>-d</option>
    option (current directory by default).</para>
    <para>The script uses programs from the libxml2 suite -
    <command>xmllint</command>(1) for RELAX NG validation and
    <command>xsltproc</command>(1) for performing XSLT
    transformations.  If necessary, the script could be easily
    modified for use with other RELAX NG validators and/or XSLT1
    processors supporting EXSLT.</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-options">
    <title>Options</title>
    <variablelist remap="TP">
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-b</option>
        <replaceable>basename</replaceable></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Specifies the basename of files in which the output
          schemas are stored. The default is the concatenation of the
          names of all input YANG modules connected with the
          underscore character "_".</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-d</option>
        <replaceable>dir</replaceable></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Specifies the directory for output files. By default
          they are stored in the current directory.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-h</option></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Displays help screen and exits.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-s</option></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Performs just validation, without (re)generating the
          schemas. This option is only allowed together with
          <option>-v</option>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-t</option>
        <replaceable>target</replaceable></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Specifies the target XML document type using one of
          the following strings as explained above:
          <userinput>dstore</userinput> (default),
          <userinput>get-reply</userinput>,
          <userinput>getconf-reply</userinput>,
          <userinput>rpc</userinput>, <userinput>rpc-reply</userinput>
          or <userinput>notif</userinput>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><option>-v</option>
        <replaceable>instance</replaceable></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Validates the instance XML document in file
          <replaceable>instance</replaceable>.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-files">
    <title>FILES</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-relaxng.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>XSLT stylesheet generating RELAX NG schemas.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-schematron.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>XSLT stylesheet generating Schematron schemas.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-dsrl.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>XSLT stylesheet generating DSRL schemas.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-common.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Common templates for all three XSLT generators.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/dsrl2xslt.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Translates a DSRL schema containing
          <emphasis>only</emphasis> specification of default contents
          to an XSLT stylesheet.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/svrl2text.xsl</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Translates an SVRL report to plain text.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>
          <filename>/usr/local/share/yang/schema/relaxng-lib.rng</filename>
        </term>
        <listitem>
          <para>RELAX NG library of common NETCONF elements.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-env">
    <title>ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><envar>PYANG_XSLT_DIR</envar></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Alternative directory for XSLT stylesheets.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><envar>PYANG_RNG_LIBDIR</envar></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Alternative directory for the RELAX NG library.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><envar>XSLT_OPTS</envar></term>
        <listitem>
          <para>Options to pass to the XSLT processor.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-examples">
    <title>Examples</title>

    <screen>$ yang2dsdl -v dhcp.xml dhcp.yang</screen>
    <para>This command generates the DSDL schemas for a datastore
    contents defined by the <filename>dhcp.yang</filename> module and
    validates an instance document stored in the
    <filename>dhcp.xml</filename> file.</para>

    <screen>$ yang2dsdl -t rpc rpc-rock.yang</screen>
    <para>This command generates DSDL schemas for the choice of input
    parts (requests) of all RPC operations defined in the module
    <filename>rpc-rock.yang</filename>.</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-diagnostics">
    <title>Diagnostics</title>
    <para><command>yang2dsdl</command> return codes have the
    following meaning:</para>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>0</term>
	<listitem><para>No error (normal termination)</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>1</term>
	<listitem><para>Error in the shell script</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>2</term>
	<listitem><para>Error in an external program</para></listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>
  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-seealso">
    <title>See Also</title>
    <para><citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>pyang</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
      </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>xsltproc</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
      </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>xmllint</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
      </citerefentry>, <ulink url="http://www.dsdl.org/">DSDL</ulink>,
      <ulink url="http://www.relaxng.org/">RELAX NG</ulink>, <ulink
      url="http://www.schematron.com">ISO Schematron</ulink>.
    </para>
    <para>The mapping procedure from YANG to DSDL is documented in the
    Internet Draft draft-ietf-netmod-dsdl-map.</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-author">
    <title>Authors</title>
    <para>The <command>yang2dsdl</command> script and XSLT stylesheets
    were written by Ladislav Lhotka
    &lt;<email>lhotka@cesnet.cz</email>&gt;.</para>
  </refsect1>

</refentry>
