<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<refentry id="refentry-yang2dsdl">
  <refentryinfo>
    <date>18 March 2010</date>
  </refentryinfo>
  <refmeta>
    <refentrytitle>yang2dsdl</refentrytitle>
    <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
    <refmiscinfo class="date">2010-03-18</refmiscinfo>
    <refmiscinfo class="manual">pyang manual</refmiscinfo>
  </refmeta>
  <refnamediv id="yang2dsdl-name">
    <refname>yang2dsdl</refname>
    <refpurpose>translates YANG data models to DSDL schemas</refpurpose>
  </refnamediv>
  <refsynopsisdiv id="yang2dsdl-synopsis">
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>yang2dsdl</command>
      <arg choice="opt">-s <replaceable>schema</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-t <replaceable>target</replaceable></arg>
      <arg choice="opt">-n <replaceable>name</replaceable></arg>
      <group choice="opt">
	<arg>-i</arg>
	<arg>-o</arg>
      </group>
      <arg choice="plain" rep="repeat">module</arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
    <cmdsynopsis>
      <command>yang2dsdl</command>
      <arg choice="plain">-h</arg>
    </cmdsynopsis>
  </refsynopsisdiv>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-description">
    <title>Description</title>
    <para>This shell script facilitates the translation of a
    configuration data model described by the input YANG module(s) to
    a DSDL schema (RELAX NG, Schematron or DSRL) for a selected
    instance XML document type. The schemas can be used for a coordinated
    validation of the instance document - RELAX NG specifies grammatical
    constraints, DSRL provides default values for missing leaf nodes
    and Schematron specifies semantic rules.</para>
    <para>The translation is carried out in two steps. The first step
    uses a plugin of the <command>pyang</command>(1) program for
    generating the conceptual schema tree (CTS) from the input YANG
    module(s). In the second step, the conceptual schema tree is
    translated using a specific XSLT stylesheet to a DSDL schema for
    the selected document type.</para>
    <para>The input module(s) can be expressed either in YANG or in
    YIN syntax. The output DSDL schema is written to the standard
    output.</para>
    <para>The script uses the <command>xsltproc</command>(1) program
    for performing the XSLT transformations but could be easily
    modified for other XSLT processors.</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-options">
    <title>Options</title>
    <variablelist remap="TP">
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-h</option></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Displays help screen and exits.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-s</option>
	<replaceable>schema</replaceable></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Select the schema to produce: <userinput>rng</userinput>
	  (RELAX NG), <userinput>sch</userinput> (Schematron) or
	  <userinput>dsrl</userinput> (DSRL). The default is
	  <userinput>rng</userinput>.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-t</option>
	<replaceable>target</replaceable></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Specify the target XML document type:
	  <userinput>dstore</userinput> ("raw" datastore contents without any
	  encapsulating elements), <userinput>get-reply</userinput> (reply to
	  &lt;get&gt; without filters), <userinput>getconf-reply</userinput>
	  (reply to &lt;get-config&gt; without filters),
	  <userinput>rpc</userinput> (RPC method whose name must be given
	  using the <option>-n</option> option) or
	  <userinput>notif</userinput> (notification whose name must be given
	  using the <option>-n</option> option). The default is
	  <userinput>get-reply</userinput>.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-n</option>
	<replaceable>name</replaceable></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>The name of the RPC method or notification, qualified
	  with the prefix of the module where the method or
	  notification is defined.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-i</option></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Specify RPC request.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><option>-o</option></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Specify RPC reply.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-files">
    <title>FILES</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-relaxng.xsl</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>XSLT stylesheet generating RELAX NG schemas.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-schematron.xsl</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>XSLT stylesheet generating Schematron schemas.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-dsrl.xsl</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>XSLT stylesheet generating DSRL schemas.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>/usr/local/share/yang/xslt/gen-common.xsl</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Common templates for all three XSLT stylesheets.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term>/usr/local/share/yang/schema/relaxng-lib.rng</term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>RELAX NG library of common NETCONF elements.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-env">
    <title>ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES</title>
    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><envar>PYANG_XSLT_DIR</envar></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Alternative directory for XSLT stylesheets.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><envar>PYANG_RNG_LIBDIR</envar></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Alternative directory for the RELAX NG library.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
      <varlistentry>
	<term><envar>XSLT_OPTS</envar></term>
	<listitem>
	  <para>Options to pass to the XSLT processor.</para>
	</listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-examples">
    <title>Examples</title>

    <screen>
$ XSLT_OPTS="-v" yang2dsdl dhcp.yang       
    </screen>
    <para>This command generates the RELAX NG schema for the reply to
    &lt;get&gt;, corresponding to the <filename>dhcp.yang</filename>
    module. The <option>-v</option> option is passed to
    <command>xsltproc</command> and provides verbose output.</para>
    <screen>
$ yang2dsdl -s sch -t rpc -n rock:rock-the-house -i rpc-rock.yang
    </screen>
    <para>This command generates the Schematron schema for the input
    part (request) of the <function>rock-the-house</function> RPC
    method defined in the module
    <filename>rpc-rock.yang</filename> whose prefix is "rock".</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-seealso">
    <title>See Also</title>
    <para><citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>pyang</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
      </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
      <refentrytitle>xsltproc</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
    </citerefentry></para>
    <para>The mapping procedure from YANG to DSDL is documented in the
    Internet Draft draft-ietf-netmod-dsdl-map.</para>
  </refsect1>

  <refsect1 id="yang2dsdl-author">
    <title>Authors</title>
    <para>The <command>yang2dsdl</command> script, CTS plugin and XSLT
    stylesheets were written by Ladislav Lhotka
    &lt;<email>lhotka@cesnet.cz</email>&gt; and <command>pyang</command> by
    Martin Björklund &lt;<email>mbj@tail-f.com</email>&gt;.</para>
  </refsect1>

</refentry>